This is Daryl Lane. Keith Johnson. And David Carson.
And the subject of this show will be First Contact.
For over a century at least since H.G. Wells' War of the Worlds,
Contact with Aliens has been one of the standard motifs of science fiction,
and certainly one of the most popular.
There are, of course, a number of possibilities coming under the heading of Alien Contact.
The Aliens may be superior. We may be superior, or there may be equality.
The Aliens might be friendly, hostile, or indifferent.
One of the most popular and fascinating possibilities of all is the story of First Contact,
one of which the first meeting between humans and aliens is treated.
Our present show will be the first of two on the subject of First Contact.
Of course, Wells started the tradition of the alien being both physically repulsive and hostile to human beings.
And the pulp magazines picked it up through the late 20s and the early 30s into the 40s.
The characteristic way of treating an alien was as a so-called bug-eyed monster.
Then the movies picked it up and carried that on through the 50s,
and, meantime, the literature took a different trend.
In the 30s, around 1934 Stanley Weinbaum published his story,
which was one of the landmarks in science fiction literature.
It was entitled, The Modern Martian Odyssey.
And it was the first treatment in the modern period of Aliens as sensitive creatures,
ones who were not hostile or aggressive, who had an environment and ecology of their own.
It took place on Mars, and Weinbaum created three or four different types of aliens on the planet.
And it's interesting for us to go back and read about those aliens,
because they were all based on the science of his day.
For instance, one of them was a silicon creature.
They knew that, well, they figured Mars was made up of sand, so one of the aliens,
Weinbaum developed for the planet, was one who ate sand.
This is quite possible.
There are two kinds of chemicals that can support life, and carbon and silicon are the two.
We're carbon-based, and silicon life is possible.
And as Asimov pointed out with Weinbaum, he said he was the first one in the history of science fiction
to develop an environment for an alien,
conceiving of him as having come from a non-Earth environment,
as being part of an ecology, which was non-human,
having thought processes, which were non-human,
having a logical system, which was non-human.
And Weinbaum, of course, also made one of his aliens, anyhow, a creature named Tweedle,
very friendly, a non-hostile, non-aggressive alien, which was very different
from the bug-eyed monster tradition, and it went over very well.
Weinbaum was in his late 20s when that story was published,
and there was an immediate market, and immediate imitators doing that kind of story.
An alien who was non-aggressive, with whom contact could be established,
and as I said, that was in 1934, in Wonder Stories, when Weinbaum wrote that landmark story.
There are several different kinds of first contact, and we're going to be talking about most of them in this treatment.
One of that being mankind's first encounter with alien beings.
Are mankind and several other alien races coming in contact with a new alien race?
Yeah, I think that has to be the criterion that no matter how many aliens have been contacted,
there still is that special feeling about meeting up with a brand new alien culture,
and the humans have to be involved with it, of course, no matter if they're along with other aliens or not.
I think that has to be the main criterion of alien contact.
Of course, the meeting up with the original first race is the most exciting and most important one,
because up until that time, the human race doesn't even know whether there are other races in existence, presumably.
After one has been in existence, then the rest, you kind of assume, are going to be there.
Usually, a first contact story will be very much tied to its particular culture or historical era.
Today, for instance, we're very much tied up with more sophisticated approaches or more sophisticated environments for it,
simply because we are expecting it to happen.
But way back in the 30s and 40s, not long after the days of the bug-eyed monster motifs,
many of the stories about first contact would be tied to what was happening in the world,
for instance, wars, racial aggressions, and so forth.
After all, another race is alien.
Xenophobia or hatred of strangers, for instance, can take place within the human race, not just with alien creatures.
And probably one of the best first contact stories of all by Murray Leinster, entitled,
Appropriately Enough First Contact.
A spaceship meets up with another, well, a spaceship from Earth meets up with a spaceship from another culture,
the first time that any kind of alien has ever been contacted.
And one of the things that happens in the story before they actually meet the humans on their ship are
discussing and worrying and wondering about what kinds of creatures are going to meet.
And Leinster has one of the characters say this,
what are we going to do about them?
Maybe these creatures will be aesthetic marvels, nice and friendly and polite,
and underneath with the sneaking, brutal ferocity of a Japanese.
Now, you obviously know that was written during the middle 40s, during the Second World War,
when the Japanese were our enemy.
But you'll find that often to be a motif of the first contact story.
But if I remember, that story did have a happy ending.
They did, they did, Leinster speculated that perhaps there would be friendliness between the two cultures.
The way he did that was fairly clever, though.
Wasn't that the case in which the two different crews actually switched spaceships,
so they went back to each other's planets in each other's spaceships,
and avoided revealing too much about themselves that way?
Yeah, that's one of the problems you'll meet in many first contact stories,
that we don't want them to know where we are, and presumably they wouldn't want us to know where they are.
And so one particular branch of the first contact story is when the two cultures,
the humans and the aliens, meet somewhere in a neutral space.
And the whole subject of that first contact story was the aliens and the humans were wondering
how can we keep them from knowing where we come from.
Another way an author might introduce a first contact story would be in the way that
Howe Clement designed his story, The Needle, written in 1950.
That being that it's a first contact story in reverse.
It's the story of an alien making first contact with people on Earth.
And the alien in this particular story is, his form is alien, but his feelings, his motives,
his emotions are very much human.
Therefore, that the reader is able to empathize with him and his plight.
The alien is more or less a detective and he is chasing a criminal.
The alien's form is a small gelatinous mass.
And they work in a parasitic relationship with a host.
And that's how the contact is made.
The alien hero inhabits the body of a young man and they, through various methods,
are able to contact and communicate with each other.
And then they go off in search of the criminal and eventually find and dispose of him.
You think that's fair? You said that the alien was more or less that human feeling.
You mentioned the fact that he was chasing a criminal.
To me, a good first contact story, a good story about aliens, must have a credible alien.
Surely some creature developing on another planet, another galaxy,
would have a whole system of logic, a whole feelings if they had feelings at all.
And we're totally non-human.
In fact, it probably would be very difficult to understand him from the basis of our psychology.
The trouble is it's much easier for a writer to create, say, a bug-eyed monster,
than to try and create an alien and his whole ecology and his whole society simultaneously
and make it incredibly different from human society.
It's a tough thing because we're all humans.
Well, I think the early presentation of the aliens, what we would call unsophisticated,
I think they almost had to do that.
I mean, an alien was usually something that looked weird, but felt like a human being.
Right. And quite often they emphasized physical or physiological characteristics.
He's alien because he's got five arms and three heads and so forth.
And they didn't consider things like his psychology.
Later on, this became a little bit more evident.
In fact, a lot of different parts of human culture were considered in the first contact stories.
For example, even religion, in the case of James Blish's case of conscience,
in which an entire planet, according to what Blish is trying to make us believe,
has been created by the adversary, by Satan.
And the aliens on this, reptilian, though they may be, are perfect creatures
who have not evidently been involved in original sin.
They're still living in essentially a garden of Eden sort of thing.
And the reaction of the human protagonist to this is the focus of the novel.
The aliens on the planet were reptilian or like small dinosaurs.
They were like a race of Vulcans, Mr. Spock, from Star Trek, and that they used pure reason.
That's one of the things that bothered the protagonist, the Jesuit priest,
is that they had a perfect society, a perfect culture, yet they had no such thing as faith,
no such thing as religion, in fact, very unemotional, in fact, no emotions.
They went totally unreasoned and they had a perfect culture.
And to the priest, that shook the very foundations of his faith,
because to have religion, to have faith, you have to have faith.
And these creatures did not know what that was.
So it was a crisis of conscience for him.
The ending of that novel, you might remember, was very ambiguous.
I think Blish intended for that to be so.
The planet was created out of an element, lithium, I believe, that was inherently unstable.
And when an earthman landed on the planet or started to set up factories of a certain kind on the planet
to use this lithium ore, either he caused the planet to disintegrate or to blow up,
or the priest at the end of the novel exercises the planet and it disappears.
And you are not told which actually was effective in the destruction of the alien race.
Some readers might find that novel a little bit slow, but I think it's a fascinating treatment
and probably more than, I would say, more than 90% of the first contact stories and novels that have been written.
I think it's probably truer to some of the feelings that the human race will have
when we actually do make first contact.
I think one of the first problems the human race will have is, are these creatures created by God?
Do they have souls?
Given the fact they have intelligence, yet do they have souls?
I think it's very easy here to see an analogy between the explorers of the old world,
the Spanish particularly, when they came to the New World and discovered the Indian cultures.
They had philosophical theological debates on whether these creatures, these Indians, had souls.
They could kill them and say, well, there's nothing wrong with this, they're animals, they don't have souls.
I think we're going to have that problem when we do run across aliens.
It's going to be a religious problem.
And I think Blis's book, A Case of Conscience, is probably the, well, is the classic treatment of that particular aspect of first contact.
Another value or another insight that a first contact story can give people is to put a perspective on the human race.
Of course, we think of ourselves usually as the center of the universe.
We think of ourselves as being the most intelligent creatures, at least on this planet, if not in the universe, of the galaxy.
And there are a number of first contact stories in which we learn humility.
One of the best I think is Gordon R. Dixon's Dolphin's Way, published in the mid-60s.
John Varley's universe, a good part of it, or the background in many of his books, comes from a similar idea.
A group of a race of super powerful invading beings has taken over the earth and has decided to contact the most intelligent species,
which in this case are dolphins and killer whales.
In fact, we learn at one point in one of his novels that the invaders classify human intelligence, or classify terrestrial intelligences on three levels.
There are the intelligent ones, which are dolphins and killer whales.
There are hive minds, or levels in which groups of species can work together, like an ant colony or a termite colony.
And he groups human beings along with these.
Human beings are not intelligent individually, according to this classification.
And on the third level are animals.
And that's a very humiliating thing.
The invaders wipe out civilization on the earth completely, human civilization anyway, without even stopping to worry about it.
And they don't even contact human beings.
Usually in most of these first contact stories, even if the contact is negative, that is, the humans are made into an inferior race,
or are shown as an inferior race compared to the aliens, at least there are some kind of communication possibilities.
In truth, it might be the case that an alien would be so different from human beings, we wouldn't even be able to communicate with them.
There are psychologists who would be so different that we'd have no common meeting ground.
Or the technology on both sides, or the lack of it, maybe such that there would be no communication.
Yes, their technology may be so far ahead of ours that we don't even think the same as they do.
I think one of the more interesting treatments in first contact would be Stanislaw Limb's Solaris.
In that mankind has found a planet orbiting around a binary star system, but the planet's orbit is stable, which would be impossible.
So they go to the planet to investigate why this planet's orbit is stable, and find out that the ocean on this planet,
which comprises most of the planet except for a few islands, is sentient or intelligent.
So they set up stations and start trying to communicate with the planet, and therein lies the crux of the story.
The hero, Chris Kelvin, has landed on a space station orbiting Solaris, and it has a few members of the crew left alive,
a Dr. Snow and a Dr. Satorius.
They both are, in essence, hiding out in certain parts of the ship and staying closed away from each other,
and Kelvin has the responsibility or the obligation of finding out why all this is going on.
During the early part of Kelvin's stay on the space station, his dead wife, Rayya, is materialized on board the ship by the ocean Solaris.
He is immediately horrified and finds a way to get rid of his first wife by sending her off in a ship,
and about a day or two after that happens, his wife is rematerialized on the ship.
This time her body is not composed of atoms and molecules the way we know them.
It's composed of neutrinos being extremely dense, but aside from that makeup of her form,
she is totally human in every respect and is deeply in love with him.
His wife had committed suicide previously because Kelvin had left her, and she, in essence, died of loneliness.
There ensues a type of morality play in which Kelvin tries to deduce why his wife is materialized at this particular time and space,
and there's several levels to the story at this point in which Kelvin is trying to figure out why she got there, how she got there,
why all this is happening at this particular point in time, and he finally deduces that it was the ocean which materialized his wife,
because his wife has knowledge which she would not have normally had had she been a living person and entity.
She had knowledge of Kelvin's, some of his innermost thoughts which he had kept secret from his wife while she was alive.
And in the end of the story, even though Kelvin can communicate with the creation of Solaris, he cannot communicate with Solaris itself.
The concepts, the thought processes, our emotions, if there are any, of this being which is literally an ocean on this entire planet,
are so far from that of human emotions of thought processes, there can be no direct contact, and the enigma of Solaris at the beginning of the book is left the same at the end of the book.
You probably call that a thought novel, wouldn't you? More or less on the...
It's very much, I would call, psychological science fiction.
It's not so much the action, the typical hero or heroine, but the possibilities.
Yeah, the psychological interplay between the two cultures and so forth.
One of the more intelligently written first contact stories to come out recently was a Moten God's Eye by Larry Niven and Jerry Pernell, and Keith Johnson has a critique on that book.
Larry Niven and Jerry Pernell have collaborated on several works. The Moten God's Eye is perhaps their most successful effort.
It is a return to the bug-eyed monster theme, but with some significant differences from the usual treatments.
The plot is an exciting and complex one, so much so that the reader will probably not pick up every twist upon the first reading.
The action takes place in the future history that has been constructed by Pernell.
Mankind has spread out among the stars. He has started wars and built up empires, and at the time of Moat has begun rebuilding a new empire from the ashes of the most recent galaxy-wide conflict.
But then the monster arrives. She is not recognized as a monster upon arrival.
Not until books end do the protagonist realize that this totally alien species that they have met is the deadly enemy of all humans.
This terrible secret is revealed gradually, piece by piece, to the reader in a very hitchcocky and way.
That first alien visitor has come into human space on the wings of a solar sail after a very long journey.
Human beings do not learn a great deal from the creature, however, largely because she is dead by the time they pick her up.
So the empire decides to send a scientific and military expedition to the planet inhabited by the alien race.
The expedition is commandeered by a character who is a cross between George Patton and Nikita Khrushchev.
His characterization provokes some humor in places.
The captain of a second ship, Rod Blaine, is the real hero, however, and he undergoes some unusual and suspenseful adventures.
His crew meets the aliens, talks with them, studies them, and becomes rather friendly with them.
In fact, before too long, the captain finds his ship overrun with aliens. Very small ones.
You see, the aliens come in several versions. There are administrators and ambassador types.
There are strong, stupid farmers and small, dexterous doctors.
These are not simply different occupations. They are completely separate subspecies of the alien race.
On Earth, the situation would be similar if gorillas had evolved a low level of human intelligence and become farmers.
Orangutans had become electrical engineers and chimpanzees had become jet pilots.
We humans, of course, would be the administrators.
Or perhaps we would be professional warriors.
This is one of the aliens' deadly secrets.
One of their forms is made up of a powerful, vicious set of super soldiers who could make the alien equivalent of mincemeat out of any human military man.
But there is a more terrible fact concealed by the aliens, and that is overpopulation.
Every alien must be made pregnant periodically, or she will die.
This has, of course, led to terrible overcrowding on the planet, so much so that periodically civilization has blasted itself back to savagery.
The planet has gone through thousands of these cycles of growth and catastrophe.
That pattern has imbued the race with a deep, frustrating fatalism, a sense of futility that makes their psychology very different from that of us humans.
At one point, a crew member who has stumbled across the secret exclaims to one of the creatures,
but man, there's got to be a way to solve this, to which the alien replies,
I am not a man, and there doesn't got to be a way.
And that's another reason I don't want contact between your species and mine.
You're all crazy. You think every problem has a solution.
The action is fast throughout the novel.
The crew of Captain Blaine's ship have interesting adventures with the friendly aliens.
Three of his crewmen are unknowingly abandoned on the planet and have some hair-raising adventures with unfriendly aliens, ending in their deaths.
The unsuspecting expedition returns home. They even bring three of the beings with them.
But in true space opera fashion, the heroes uncover the truth by means of their human cleverness and isolate the aliens in their home system.
And the novel ends, as do many of Niven's works, somewhat inconclusively.
The book offers several fascinating new concepts and more than a few contrasting features.
Perhaps these are a result of the dual authorship.
The empire is dreadfully old-fashioned, is modeled after a 15th-century monarchy with its hierarchical structure.
Women are worshiped in a way that must have set Ursula Le Guin's teeth on edge.
There is a distinct flavor of space opera in the action.
Yet there are some recent social issues incorporated in the book.
The overpopulation problem of the aliens is probably Niven's idea of the dangers that face human society before the end of the century today.
Again, the aliens are old-fashioned monsters, even if nobody realizes it at first.
We are led to understand why they are monstrous, however, almost to the point of sympathizing with them.
One of the most difficult tasks in the writing of science fiction is the construction of a truly alien being.
Pornell and Niven have done an admirable job.
The novel is not without flaws.
Human society is depressingly similar to today's version of it.
And there are some funny anachronisms, which I suspect my colleagues will bring up in a few moments.
But for imaginative invention and excitement, the motin god's eye will fit on anyone's bookshelf.
Niven and Pornell have done something very interesting in that book.
Earlier, we had all of us recognized and mentioned that there's been an increase in sophistication from the early treatment of aliens.
These bug-eyed monsters, evolving through wine bomb story where they are friendly and non-aggressive.
This in a sense is a return to the bug-eyed monster.
They don't look like bug-eyed monsters.
In fact, some of the humans, if I remember, almost want to pet them because they have soft fur on their bodies.
But on the other hand, their exterior appearance belies a very hostile intention toward humans.
So in a sense, this is going backwards.
Another interesting fact that, or what, sophisticated or clever thing that Niven and Pornell have done in the book is the levels of comparative intelligence between the humans and the moties, as I believe they're called in the book, because they come from the moat.
When you come right down to it, the moties or the aliens were more intelligent than the humans were.
Yes, very much so.
It was only the lack of an interstellar drive, I think, that had caused them to remain in their own little section of the galaxy.
They were bottled up in their own solar system.
Yes.
In fact, it was kind of an interesting twist.
Quite often we read about galactic empires, asimovs and many others, in which the human beings are asked whether they want to join this benevolent galaxy-wide empire.
And here it's the other way around. The aliens still are more intelligent and more competent than we are, but they're asking whether they can join our empire.
This is Daryl Lane, Keith Johnson, and David Carson.